The circle with sectors is not a desirable form of presentation, however, because it does not have nearly such flexibility as the method shown in Fig. 1. The sector method does not permit of convenient arrangement of names for the different components. Note that the direction of the lettering must be reversed as the eye proceeds around the circle. In this case, "Interest and Dividends" reads upward while "Materials, Rents, Traveling Expenses, etc." reads downward. Another disadvantage of the sector method is the impossibility of placing figures in such manner that they can be easily compared or added. The horizontal-bar method permits of placing figures so as to keep the decimal points in line, thus making it possible to add the whole column of figures relating to the various components.

The sector method is probably so widely known through presentation in exhibits, illustrations for popular magazines, etc., that it is more generally understood than any other method now in use. The more easy reading of the wedge or sector chart is, however, largely due to habit. If the horizontal-bar method of Fig. 1 were used as frequently as the sector method, it would be found in every way more desirable than the sector method and would, in a very short time, become so well known that it would be read much more quickly and accurately than the method involving sectors.

- Brinton (1919) Graphic Methods for Presenting Facts, pg 6-7 (pg 29-30, Google Books PDF)




Throughout your study of charts you will find some which are more useful for popular consumption than others, but you will not find many which are more purely popular in appeal than the 100% circle or pie diagram. For analytical purposes it has nothing to recommend it, but for sensational values it is in general without an equal. If you are research- bent, you may safely pass by this chapter on popular exegesis, but if your object is advertising, you will seize it to your heart. We have just seen how a single bar can be taken to represent 100% and can be cut up into segments or parts the lengths of which correspond to the relative sizes or percentages of the various parts of the 100%. The fact that the line is a unit, and so long as it remains the whole, can never be more than a unit or 100%, should suggest something. It should suggest that the total length of the whole line is relatively unimportant. It is unimportant because the reader is not asked to compare the total length of the line with the total length of any other line. There is no other line to compare it with, unless a second 100% bar is lying around handy, in which case the second would presumably have the same length, because it too represents 100%. Hence, you will say, why have any total length at all?

Centuries ago it was a moot question among philosophers, whether the Lord could make a yardstick which was endless. Then someone suggested that the yardstick be bent into circular form and the question was dropped. Let us perform the same operation on a 100% bar. Imagine, if you wish, that the bar is so very thick for its length that while one edge becomes the circumference of the circle, the other shortens down to and becomes the center of the circle. Division lines between the component parts of the bar become rays or radii of the circle and serve to mark off the corresponding component segments of the area of the circle. Here you have in a nut-shell
the pedigree of the pie-chart.

It is now time to let you into the secret that the rule of dimensions of charts, which you doubtless memorized in a previous chapter, has apparent exceptions. The pie-chart is one of them. For few readers will judge quantities by either the arc at the perimeter of the circle or the subtended angles at its center on the contrary most of them will judge entirely by the areas of the segments. In short, the pie-chart appears to be a two-dimension (area) chart used for one-dimension data. The fact is, however, that, as in the case of the 100% bar, the area of the chart varies directly with one dimension, the other dimension being constant. In the 100% bar the width of the bar was constant in the 100% circle the radius must be constant for all circles compared. Then the area of the segments varies directly with their arcs or angles and the chart has but one significant dimension. It is only an apparent exception to the rule.

The disadvantages of the pie-chart are many. It is worthless for study and research purposes. In the first place, the human eye cannot easily compare as to length the various arcs about the circle, lying as they do in different directions. In the second place, the human eye is not naturally skilled at comparing angles-those angles at the center of the circle, formed by the various rays or radii and subtending the various arcs. In the third place, the human eye is not an expert judge of comparative sizes of areas, especially those as irregular as the segments of parts of the circle. There is no way by which the parts of this round unit can be compared so accurately and quickly as the parts of a straight line or bar. Moreover, when, as frequently happens, several pie-charts are shown together, the various slices in one chart cannot be so easily compared with the corresponding slices in the next, as can the various parts of one 100% bar with corresponding parts of another bar. The two bars can be placed one above the other, so that comparison from one to the other can be made at once, but no arrangement of the two circles will make comparison so simple. In the labelling of the pie-chart, you will furthermore encounter typographical difficulties. It is not ordinarily a good thing to make a reader crane his neck at various angles to read writing along every point of the compass, so you should not, as so many do, write on radii from the center of the circle. On the other hand, unless the chart and its segments are very
large as compared with the size of the printing, you will introduce tricky optical illusions if you write all labels in the same directions inside the segments.